---
layout: post
title: "Tensors using NumRuby"
date: 2021-02-16 21:49
author: Udit Gulati
comments: true
categories: [Ruby, NMatrix, NumRuby, Ruby-Sparse]
---

Tensor word can have slightly different meaning depending upon the nature of study, like it's defined differently in Physics, slightly different in computer science. In computer terms, it is basically a n-dimensional array. A scalar (one value) is a tensor with 0 dimensions, a vector is a tensor with 1 dimension, a matrix is a tensor with 2 dimensions.

It's possible to define a tensor in Ruby using the `Array` class of Ruby but it gets tedious when defining multi-dimensional tensors. Also, the `Array` object is designed to be heterogeneous which means that the elements of the array can be of different type or different classes which would seem as a plus point overall but it has a huge downside. Due to `Array` being heterogeneous, the memory allocation has to be in such a way that any element of any size can be added or removed from the array, which causes a lot of re-allocations. Also, the indexing and other array functions gets slower due to the heterogeneous nature.

What if there's a scenario where there is only one type of tensor elements, which means that a homogeneous array would also do, and there are memory and speed constraints? `NumRuby` is the solution for such requirements. 

## Tensors in NumRuby

A tensor can be defined using the `NMatrix` object of `NumRuby`.

```ruby
N = NMatrix.new [shape], [elements], :type
```

`shape` is the number of dimensions and size of each dimension of the tensor. For example, `[2, 2, 2]` shape tensor is a tensor with 3 dimensions and each dimension of size 2, hence number of elements is 8. A sample value of elements array for this could be `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]`. `type` is the data type of each of the tensor element, it could be any of `:nm_bool`, `:nm_int`, `:nm_float32`, `:nm_float64`, `:nm_complex32` or `:nm_complex64` depending on the requirements.

An example usage is shown below:

```ruby
[1] pry(main)> N = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [1, 2, 3, 4], :nm_int
=> 
[
 [1, 2], 
 [3, 4]
]
[2] pry(main)> N.elements
=> [1, 2, 3, 4]
[3] pry(main)> N.shape
=> [2, 2]
[4] pry(main)> N[0, 0]
=> 1
[5] pry(main)> N[1, 0]
=> 3
[6] pry(main)> N.dtype
=> :nm_int
```

## Elementwise Operations

One can also perform elementwise operations using `NumRuby`. Elementwise operations are broadly of 2 types, Uni-operand and bi-operand.

### Uni-Operand Operations

Uni-operand operators are those that apply to just one tensor. For example, sine, cos or tan of each of element of the tensor.

```ruby
[1] pry(main)> N = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [1, 2, 3, 4], :nm_float64
=> 
[
 [1.0, 2.0], 
 [3.0, 4.0]
]
[2] pry(main)> N.sin
=> 
[
 [0.8414709848078965,  0.9092974268256817], 
 [0.1411200080598672, -0.7568024953079282]
]
[3] pry(main)> N.cos
=> 
[
 [ 0.5403023058681398, -0.4161468365471424], 
 [-0.9899924966004454, -0.6536436208636119]
]
```

### Bi-Operand Operations

Bi-operand operators are those that apply to two tensor. For example, addition, subtraction or multiplication of each of the corresponding elements of the the 2 tensor.

```ruby
[1] pry(main)> N = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [1, 2, 3, 4], :nm_float64
=> 
[
 [1.0, 2.0], 
 [3.0, 4.0]
]
[2] pry(main)> M = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [2, 2, 3, 3], :nm_float64
=> 
[
 [2.0, 2.0], 
 [3.0, 3.0]
]
[3] pry(main)> N+M
=> 
[
 [3.0, 4.0], 
 [6.0, 7.0]
]
[4] pry(main)> N*M
=> 
[
 [2.0,  4.0], 
 [9.0, 12.0]
]
```

## Linear Algebra

`NumRuby` also supports linear algebra capabilities for 2-dimensional tensors. One can easily do operations such as matrix inverse, dot product, matrix decompositions.

```ruby
[1] pry(main)> N = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [1, 2, 3, 4], :nm_float64
=> 
[
 [1.0, 2.0], 
 [3.0, 4.0]
]
[2] pry(main)> M = NMatrix.new [2, 2], [2, 2, 3, 3], :nm_float64
=> 
[
 [2.0, 2.0], 
 [3.0, 3.0]
]
[3] pry(main)> N.dot(M)
=> 
[
 [ 8.0,  8.0], 
 [18.0, 18.0]
]
[4] pry(main)> N.invert
=> 
[
 [-1.9999999999999996,  0.9999999999999998], 
 [ 1.4999999999999998, -0.4999999999999999]
]
[5] pry(main)> N.det
=> -2.0
```